 Well, you have to be careful. First of all, the name is wrong. It's not artificial intelligence. It's not intelligence. Intelligence would involve consciousness, and I've always been a strong, I. Promoter of the idea that these devices are not conscious and they will not be, be conscious as unless they bring in some other ideas. The compute, they're not, they're all computable notions. I think when people use the word intelligence, they mean something which is conscious. I mean, that you see. I developed my own ideas after going to a course. You see, when I was a graduate student in Cambridge, I went to three courses, which were nothing to do what I was supposed to be doing. One was by Bondi on general relativity. One was be Dirac on quantum mechanics. Distinguished, very distinguished, Paul Durak, and the third subject was on mathematical logic. And I learned about touring machines and computer, the notion of cute computability and I notion knew what computability meant, and I learned about girdle theorem. And girdle theorem. I found stunning because it told you that there are things that, the understanding transcends the use. Let me put that more clearly. What Girdle does, it's very clever. What he does is to produce a statement. Now, I suppose you, you see you're trying to develop your mathematical. Methods of proof. What do you mean by proving a theorem in mathematics? How do you know it's really true? Well, you prove it. What does proof mean? Well, you see, does it mean okay, you've got a set of rules, and if you follow these rules, that makes you to proof? Mm-hmm. Now, how do you know these rules only give you truths? Well, you've looked at them carefully and you say, oh yeah, but maybe AI creates its own rules. Ah, no, no. You see, you have to be careful about this. This is the point, but I, I learned from, from Ste. This was a man called Steen who was a logician, and I learned from him this important thing about girdle's theorem. Now, girdle's theorem is extremely clever. You make a statement which asserts that it's, it cannot be proved by these rules. It is just you. The clever thing is to make it do it. It says you give your rules, which are you regard as the rules of proof, and you could put them on a computer, so that means they're computational rules. Now, I knew that there were things that you cannot have put on a computer. I learned from this course that there are non-comp computable things. There are things in mathematics which are not computable. Now what does the computer mean? It means that you can make a computer. Well, you have to define what a computer is. And touring had one definition of a computer. There were several other church and Curry. Other people had their definitions of com computer. They all turned out to be equivalent. So there is one universal notion of computability. Which is what you mean by what can be done by a computer. Maybe this is only language problem. It's not a language problem. You see, you make your new language. Sure you can do that. You make your new language and that's what you can do. You see, let me describe the girdle theorem, how it works. You see? See the girdle theorem says you construct a statement which says. Uh, you see what it means, the way you've constructed the sentence. You can see what it means and what it means is I am not provable by those rules. I. And it does that. It really says that. Then you see, okay, well, is it, perhaps it is provable by the rules. If it is provable by the rules, then it must be true. Well, I've said it, the wrongly wrong. It doesn't matter the other way. Suppose it's false, then that means it's provable by the rules. And if it's provable by the rules, you've understood the rules. You said, oh, you look at them all and say, yes, that's okay. That's okay. That sure if you follow those rules. It is true. I. So that means you believe that the rules only give you truths. So therefore it is true that it's not provable by the rules. If it's false, you see then it is provable by the the rules and therefore it's true. So it has to be true and not provable by the rules. I found that amazing, but still, I don't understand why AI cannot create its own rules because it doesn't know that they're true. You see that's this whole point about the girdle theorem. The whole point, as far as I'm concerned about the girdle theorem is how do you transcend the rules? And that's what you do by understanding them, you understand them why they're true. It's not that you use the rules, but you understand why use of the rules only give you truths, and that's how you can prove things which go beyond the rules by knowing why they're true. Now knowing why they're true. Well, what does it mean? Well, it means you understand them. What does understand mean? You've gotta be conscious of them. You see you, the wording is clear. It means that you have to know what you're doing. You have to know why they're true. Not that they're true. You can be told that they're true. You can have, you can learn at school that they're true. That's not the point. You have to know why they're true. Why they're true needs. Understanding them and understanding them requires to being conscious of them. Now, that's require that you see, the point I was making is that consciousness enables you to transcend the rules. You see why they're true and that goes you, but beyond it, you see what the girdle theorem does. It tells you how to use your understanding of why the rules are true to transcend the rules. You think that AI is the simple tool or simple thing that we can use in the single case? Uh, no. I don't say single. It's obviously infinite. No, clearly that's not the point. The point is it doesn't know what it's doing. That's still true with ai. You talk to an AI thing, it doesn't know what it's doing. It has, it speaks from experiences if you like. You see, people have confused the story. The story is they've lost it in the power of computing. The thing is that computers have got so powerful that they've lost the thread of what they're doing. I think the point has got lost. With current. And you know, I think Turing wasn't too far off. You see, he, he was a little bit confused person in a way because he, uh, it was not clear what he believed. But he did call this thing the Turing test. How do you de decide whether an entity is conscious or not? Will you have a conversation with it? You talk to it. Maybe AI is a newser of human existence. No. It's missing something, I think. Yeah. That's the trouble you see. It is all, I mean, obviously it has a role to play. I'm not gonna say that clearly. It has a role to play. I. It has a role, but you must mustn't be confused. The fact that it has a role to play, it's to do with the power of computation. Sure. Computers have got so powerful now that they can do things way beyond what humans do in compute computing. Sure. And you can take a massive data and you can. Analyze that data and you can see what the data says. And does this thing co in accordance with previous things in the data or is it not? And ai, that's all it does. It doesn't understand what it's doing and understanding is different from computing.