So in this talk we saw the problem um  when an engineer is trying to build  consciousness you need to bring all the  senses together use a lot of energy and  try to hope somehow  uh they will arise into something akin  to emotion. But what if you just cannot  do it? What if just computation in a  classical world is not enough to become  conscious? So our last speaker is of  course Robert Roger Penrose who has been  thinking about this for a very long time  and we are very lucky that he found some  time to come and tell us about it.  Well, thank you very much for giving me  the  opportunity to waffle on a subject which  has interested me for a long  time. I'm not going to talk about  interesting things like octopuses and  bats and things like that which is  fascinating nor about emotions which is  clearly something to do with  consciousness but two boring old numbers  um mainly to begin with at least natural  numbers. What's a natural number? Well  that means 0 1 2 3 4 etc.  when I say etc. you get the idea but I'm  not going to say any more about  that. Okay. Well, what I want to talk  about really goes back to about 70 years  ago. I could have given this talk  perhaps 70 years ago at least most of it  because it emerges from a course of  lectures that I went to when I was a  graduate student in  Cambridge and I went to three courses of  lectures which were nothing whatsoever  to do with my subject. I thought three  years is a long time and so I can spend  my early years doing some other things  which weren't connected with my topic  which was in pure mathematics. Of  course, that was a stupid idea because I  didn't finish in time anyway. But  nevertheless, I went to a lecture by  Herman Bondi on general relativity. Had  a big influence on me later on in life.  I wonderful lectures I should say. Also,  I went to a course of lectures by the  great Paul Dra on quantum mechanics  which also had a great influence on me.  But the third lecture course which was  nothing to do with what I was supposed  to be doing was a course by a man man  called  Steen on mathematical logic and it was  really about numbers one 0 1 2 3 4  etc.  And well, you see how do you in  mathematics you want to say things not  that just 3 + 2 equals 5 or something  like that or bigger numbers than that or  huge numbers like what computers can do.  No, you want to say something about all  numbers. Well, you learn in school, I  hope you still do. I'm not quite sure  what people learn in school nowadays,  but the pro process of mathematical  induction. So you can prove something is  true for all numbers by just proving a  couple of things. For mathematical  induction, you want to show something's  true for all n all natural numbers n  then you can say if it's true for n then  it's true for n + one. That's one thing  you show and then you show show it's  true for n equals zero and that shows  it's true for all numbers. So I was  really fascinated by that idea. You just  do a finite number of things and you can  show something is true for all numbers  all natural numbers let's say when I say  natural number I mean a non- negative  whole number now this course of lectures  talked about this famous result due to  Kurt Girdle which I didn't really like  the idea of because it seemed to show  that there were things in mathematics  you couldn't prove I didn't like that  idea at all anyway so I went to the  course it was fascinating and the first  part of the course was really merely  about computability very notion of  computability which is very much part of  what computers do of course well that's  the name and uh that was interesting but  then he did talk about this famous  theorem of go and it wasn't really what  I it was something quite different in a  way not that there were things you  couldn't prove but what was it now  suppose you have a certain set of things  that you can use in a proof. See a  mathematical proof you have certain set  of axioms and then you have a certain  set of rules of procedure. So you have  these axioms and then you can combine  them together in various ways and if you  can get the result out that you're  trying to show um such as for example  well simple example would be if you add  two even numbers you get another even  number. A not so simple example would be  a number due to a proposition a  statement a theorem due to  lrange interesting theorem because it  the great leonhard oiler tried to prove  it and couldn't so it's quite  interesting that is to say that every  natural number is the sum of four square  numbers it's a good  example and it's telling you about all  numbers finite statement  and not so easy to prove but  nevertheless you can prove it. Now what  does the proof mean? Well, usually it  would mean you have your set of axioms  and rules of procedure and if you use  them correctly and you derive this  result from those axioms and rules of  procedure then you've got a proof. Now  what did Girdle do? He was it was very  clever and I won't go into the details  of the cleverness. quite tricky in some  ways. But what he showed was that you  could make a statement which in effect  said I am not provable by those  rules and it's a definite mathematical  statement you can construct it and the  interpretation you see what it means and  how it's constructed and it says oh yes  it does really mean that if you  understand what these things mean it  means I am not pro when I say I am the  statement talking if you like I am not  provable by those rules rules you've  given me. Okay. Well, you can say, well,  maybe it's false. But if it's false,  then it is provable by the rules, and  therefore it has to be true. It has to  be true, but it's not provable by the  rules. Now, this is very strange. You've  got something which is true. You know  it's true. How do you know it's  true? Not by using those rules, because  it's not provable by those rules. You  know, it's true because you understand  why the rules only give you truths. And  I think that's really very remarkable.  It's your understanding of why the rules  work gives you more than using the  rules. What does that mean? What does  understanding what the rules mean mean?  Well, it's this awkward word  understanding. What is  understanding? Well, it's something that  involves  consciousness. You see, it's a sort of  in the ordinary use of language. You say  an entity, does it understand something  or not? Well, it rather implies by the  use of the word understanding that it's  at least aware of what it's trying to  do. Can something understand something  without even being aware of it? Well,  not in ordinary usage. I mean people  might quibble about that but the  ordinary usage of the term understanding  means at least it it's aware of what  it's thinking about or doing or  something awareness awareness  consciousness so it does seem to imply  that this is something to do with  consciousness and I found this very  striking as I say about 70 years ago I  could have given that much of my talk  and I began to think Well, I'm a  physicalist, too. So, I believe  whatever's going on in our  heads must be in accordance with the  laws of physics. So, there's whatever  the laws those laws are, they have to be  something. Well, could be they be  something you could put on a computer.  Well, then they would be computable and  then you would be back in the trouble of  the girdle thing. And it seems to me  it's got to be something in the physical  laws. As I say, I'm a physicist. It's  not something magic which comes in when  whatever that it is something to do with  the organization of this stuff which is  going in our heads or in the octopus's  head or whatever. There's something  going on there which is acting in  accordance with the laws of physics but  is not really something computable. As I  say the beginning of the course I went  to by ste involved the notion of  computability and all that stuff and so  I understood vaguely what that meant.  more or less it means what you could put  on a  computer. Now this says that there is  something beyond the understanding of  what what you're doing seems to be  something beyond what you could put on a  computer. Now of course people might  argue about that. Now I think it's a  strong case to show that there are  things which are not computable which  are going on in the physical world and  that includes this phenomenon of  consciousness. But then I began to  wonder what in the physical world could  possibly be  non-computable? Well, I mean, you put  things on computers, Newtonian  mechanics, sure, you can go ahead and do  that. What  about uh well, Maxwell's equations? You  have a little bit of a problem with  these things. You have to worry a little  about, which I think is a genuine worry  because these laws of physics depend on  the continuum. They're not just about  the the natural numbers 0 1 2 3 4. They  depend on filling in the gaps between  the natural numbers if you like and  that's not a trivial issue. I just take  the view which I still take the view but  it's not that's not really the problem.  You can put things well enough on a  computer even if they're not exactly the  continuum. You can approximate them. I  think there is a  possible lacuna in the argument there  which I have often wondered about. But  let's take the root which I'm taking  here. It's not that you can get closely  enough to uh the na to the continuum  with your natural numbers to put your  computer to work. And well that that  time computers weren't so good at doing  general relativity. The general  relativity the Einstein's theory of  gravity and space and time and all that  stuff. that theory you can put it on the  computer and you're doing the  approximations in a normal sort of way  and nowadays you can do wonderful things  with these computers the LIGO detector  you  can know that there are black holes  colliding and producing gravitational  waves and the signals are very  calculated very well calculated and you  know exactly what's going on. So this is  very much a computational issue that's  not where it lies. So it's not to do  directly with these theories of the  continuum or  something. What about quantum mechanics?  Well, quantum  mechanics was a little bit unclear  there. How about the Schrodinger  equation which I I said I went to DA's  lectures and I learned about um how how  these equations  work. Simply differential equations.  They can be difficult to use because  there are many variables and so on. can  be quite tricky to use uh but still it's  still computation in the same  sense except that what is quantum  mechanics well it consists of two parts  people don't quant emphasize this very  much um Einstein and Schroinger  certainly did they say that well even  Draq as I learned later said that  quantum mechanics is not complete in  some sense I'm going to be a bit rudest  than that it's not just not complete  it's not quite right. Why do I say it's  not quite right? Well, you see what is  quantum mechanics? How do what what is  the subject? Well, you have a thing  called the wave function, the state  vector, if you like, and the Schroinger  equation tells you how that state vector  or wave function evolves in time. If you  know what it is now, you will know what  it is in 10 minutes. You'll know what it  is in a 100 years.  So according to the Schroinger equation,  it's a deterministic equation. You could  put it on a computer, do any precision  you  like, but the world doesn't satisfy the  shing equation. I'm saying that quite  brutally when I say quantum mechanics  isn't quite right. This is what I mean.  Why is that? Well, because the theory of  quantum mechanics depends on something  else than the Schroinger equation. It's  a thing which is rather impolitely  called the collapse of the wave  function. Schroinger tells you how the  wave function evolves. But the world  doesn't quite do that. Every now and  again it does something else. What do I  mean by every now and again? Well,  Schroinger who made the sort of emphasis  by this and by talking about his famous  cat. People often re misinterpret that  in my view. They say well it's really  shows if you had a really subtle system  which which you could actually have your  cat in it and you could calculate  exactly what happened according to the  Schroing equation. Then you could make a  cat which is dead and alive at the same  time. That's not what Schwinger was  saying. He was saying this is an  absurdity. There's something wrong. And  I believe he was right to say there is  something wrong. There's something  wrong. You see what is what is the  collapse of the wave function? Well,  people usually interpret it as say well  you look at the wave function or  something. You measure it. You do a  measurement on it. And this means you  adopt a different procedure. You don't  follow the Schroing equation. You follow  another procedure which you gives you a  sequence of probabilities and it's the  probability of this or this or this or  this. And that's what you do at that  stage. you do something else in the  Schroinger equation. You collapse the  wave function. You make a  measurement. Okay. Well, there are  theories which tell you how that if the  system gets involved with the  environment, it gets so complicated use  a different procedure. I won't go into  all that. There's famous theorem due to  Landau and vonman which tells you if you  take the environment into consideration  then this you follow a certain procedure  and you get this sequence of  probabilities. If you look at it  carefully, you see it actually involves  what I call a double well a double cheat  or I say cheat which is an  ontology switch. That is you have a  certain view about how the theory  relates to the real world and then you  change your view to something different.  Technically, it's you change from the  wave function to what's called a density  matrix and then you change it back again  to probability mixture of different wave  functions. And that's where you're  cheating. You do a double cheat. It's a  very good cheat. I would say it's the  sort of thing which gives you the right  answer. And it's a really very  impressive thing to do. I'm not saying  that what Landon von Nolman did was was  rubbish. Absolutely not. It was very  clever. But it does involve this double  ontology shift to cheats if you like  that to do a big good physicist you know  how to cheat properly. I think that's  that's part of the idea and uh okay  that's fine part of the game but it's  more important to see what's going on  what's really going on there. Now I took  the view because of this part first part  of my talk that what's going on has to  be something which is not  computable. Now that's was not a normal  view about these things. People often  would say about me well I waffle about  consciousness and all my really talking  about this teensy weasy little thing  which has to do with um mathematics in a  particular area or something like that.  And what's that got to do with the main  problems like uh well feelings and  goodness knows and what do I have to say  about the different impression that blue  and pink have sure they look completely  different they feel completely different  I don't have anything whatsoever to say  about that I mean of course there are  various things with certain conditions  in the brain you get confused about  which is blue and pink and all that  stuff I don't happen to have that  problem but  um I I have nothing to say. I have no  idea. The little tiny wensy thing that I  do have something to say about is this  issue of computability which tells me  that there is something going on in  consciousness in understanding in this  very particular way in which  consciousness is being employed. an  important way because it involves  understanding and in understanding in  the world of a world at some level or  another is absolutely crucial. I'm sure  it's true for the octopuses we just  heard about. They understand something  about what's going on and that's very  important to them. Now, what does  understanding mean? Well, you have to be  conscious of it. But I mean that's going  one way around and it's not saying much  about our feelings and blue and purple  and whatever it is. But it is saying  something about  something which the point I'm making is  this is telling it that is that the  consciousness thing that we're trying to  search for seems to depend on something  that goes beyond any of these theories  I've talked about. But you see the clue  I claim in quantum mechanics because  it's incomplete or as I my rud phase not  quite right it's wrong in a certain  sense that when a system gets big enough  that these superp positions being here  at the same time something like that  well that was what Dak was saying he I  didn't quite gather the explanation he  gave I think I was staring out of the  window I know I missed it which was  probably a good thing because that meant  I I never understood what he said and  probably what he was said was to  something to smooth it over and stop you  worrying about the problem. I'm sure it  was something like that and I didn't get  that bit. So I did worry about the  problem for ever since which is what on  earth is going on. is something which is  not in current physics and it involves  the collapse of the wave function which  is a physical process and the laws of  which are something we don't know and  which I'm claiming are not computational  that's if you like the only place that I  could see it can seriously be in there  little possibilities it could be that I  think this is the easily the most likely  that it's in the collapse of the wave  function that we have something beyond  our present understanding which allows  us to understand things or some way go  beyond pure computability and I guess  people won't like this very much because  modern computers of course they're doing  because they don't do the infinite  things you see well at the beginning of  my talk I was saying you could talk  about the infinite you can talk about in  a serious way in a rigorous way and it  doesn't matter your computer can I Some  of these very early results I remember  learning about skews skews theorem which  was something which was those times it  was some number which was absolutely  huge way beyond what any computer even  today could get anywhere close to and  you had to get beyond this number to see  that this result happened to be true.  this happened to be a number thing in  number theory I won't bother you with um  anyway so the the point of view I had  was this quality of understanding  it'sn't be anything to do with  mathematics that's just a way you see it  you see the role of being something  beyond our physical understanding  now all this is old hat when I say I  could have been talk maybe not 70 years  ago but maybe about 50 years ago I could  have given that talk but There are  certain ideas about this which are much  more recent. I've tried to understand a  bit more about the collapse of the wave  function and how it relates to  relativity and it has a very curious  relation to relativity. Let me give you  a sort of example of this. I think in  the early days people used to worry  about the wave function and they said is  it real in some  sense? Mathematicians who know what a  wave function is said no it's complex.  Oh, that's not what I mean. It's is it  really there or is it just some kind of  artifact that we use in our  calculations? And Einstein put forward a  rather impressive condition. He said  something is real  if you can make a measurement on it and  if this measurement gives you yes with  certainty and without disturbing the  system then it gives you a  reality. What I'm trying to say now is  that it does give you a reality but it's  a kind of reality which is a little  peculiar. It's what I'm calling quantum  reality. And I make the point that there  are different kinds of reality. There's  classical reality and there is quantum  reality and they're not quite the same.  The main difference is that classical  reality you can ascertain it. I could  take my sticks here and I say hello  stick. What's your shape? Well, I can it  it will say I'm more or less cylindrical  up to here. I'm another slightly smaller  cylinder and I've got a little spike on  the end and all that sort of stuff. and  it can describe the shape exactly. Well,  close enough. So that's what classical  reality is like. You can say hello state  and what what is your state like? And it  can just give you this description.  Quantum reality is not like that. And I  give you a good example. The spin of an  electron that's an example of a spin  half particle. The spin of an electron.  The state of that can be described by  taking some direction. say the direction  of my thumb and it is spinning  right-handed about that direction. Every  state of spin is spinning right-handed  about some direction. Now that is  quantum reality. If I find a state and I  want to know say hello state, which way  are you spinning? It looks at me blankly  and says I don't answer questions like  that. Suggest a direction. So I might  say I know because I know this state  came about from some complicated  experiment it would be spinning that  about that direction and I can I can ask  the I can confirm by saying are you by  any chance spinning about right-handed  about that direction and the spin then  says yep you got it right every time you  got it right and that is quantum reality  but if I say tell me which direction  you're spinning in it says nope I don't  answer that kind of question that's the  difference so it's true about Einstein's  idea of reality but it's quantum reality  and this kind of reality is important to  understand because it behaves very  peculiarly with regard to  time and I did study this and I wrote an  article about this once and you think is  that the fact that you can't ascertain  It is important. You can confirm it but  not ascertain it. And there are  experiments there things that call EPR  experiments, Einstein, Pedoski, Rosen  experiments and things like this which  seem to be very curious. They seem to  indicate that signal can be sent from  well it's always Alice and Bob are the  two. Alice has a spin half particle. Bob  has another one. They start from a stage  of spin zero and then they they sort of  spin oppositeely to each other. and  Alice makes a measurement  instantaneously Bob's state is going the  other way. It's worse than that. It's  before backwards in time his thing goes  the other  way. Does that contradict relativity?  No. Because it's quantum reality. Bob  can't ask his state which way you  spinning. He can say do you happen to be  spinning this way? And then give you an  answer. It's important to know that  distinction because quantum reality  behaves very peculiarly with regard to  time. It doesn't quite go backwards in  time, but it does something rather like  that. And I think it's important perhaps  to relate this to things I I when I  wrote my book, The Emperor's New Mind,  um this was my first toying with these  ideas and sort of writing a semi-popular  book and uh I thought it would might  inspire young people. I only got uh  commentaries from old retired people who  were old enough to to spend enough time  to read my book. But then I did get a  message. Well, I have got some people  from young people later. That's good.  From Stuart Hammerov who did read my  book and he got back to me and said,  "You evidently don't he was a bit more  polite than that. Evidently, you never  heard of microtubules, have you?" You  see, I'd learned about the Hodskin  Huxley theory of nerve propagation and I  realized that's hopeless. If you want to  preserve quantum quantum states, it  doesn't doesn't do it. I mean that it  disturbs the environment too much and  that's not what you want. If  consciousness couldn't be just by nerve  propagation, there had to be something  else. And he said, well, how about  microtubules? Well, I won't go into that  story and I think it's an important  story. Seems to me there is a reasonable  chance that there is something in the  microtubules which requires quantum  reality notions and there could be  something more. In fact, there are  certain ideas which Stuart has gone  into. I don't really follow all these  things now but there are certain lay  layer of the brain you see one thing  that I learned about I learned sort of  elementary things about neurohysiology  not and one things they were sort of  blatantly obvious things one is things  that the cerebrum and the cerebellum are  different the cerebrum is has this  stupid crossing over some people say oh  it's a mistake or something no it's not  a mistake the other is the cerebellum  which didn't make that mistake mistake  no cerebellum is right hand side goes  the right way and the left hand side um  is sp controls and is controlled by the  left hand side. There's no none of this  stupid crossing over. So the cerebrum  does all this crazy stuff. It's doing it  for a reason. I don't know what the  reason is but there is obviously  something else going on than just nerve  propagation. And I think he's right in  that. And I didn't know there anything  which is different between these two  parts of the brain. And then he points  out well there's certain cells called  parameal cells where the microtubules  have all different organizations and  things like I don't want to go into that  I don't understand it myself but the  claim is that you could maybe you see  the the issue which I was worry about  another issue  is it seems to be that things happen I I  I think in my book the emperor's new  mind I did refer to these experiments to  Benjamin Libbit which seem to indicate  something very curious about temporal  uh when you actually experience  something when does a conscious feeling  of something or other happen and it  seems the time is all messed up in some  peculiar way that it's not somehow it  goes almost as though it's  retroactive and maybe it is in some  sense because the classical I mean  quantum reality can do that classical  reality can't. You got to be damn  careful that you don't get causality  problems. But if it's quantum reality,  it's not going to cause you a problem. I  don't want to talk about this in any  detail because first of all, I don't  understand it in any detail. And  secondly, it would confuse everybody  else. But I do want to say that there  could well be something in what's going  on in the brain which involves this  quantum reality notion and these very  curious in experiments made by Benjamin  Libbit which seem to indicate that there  is something very puzzling about the  timing of conscious  experience and it relates to the way see  you think of a pingpong player I used to  try and playing ping pong in my youth  and it's clearly you have to make it  you've got to want to make a decision am  I going to flick the ball to the right  or to the left well I judged where my  opponent is and I think if I flip it  this way it's more likely it will  unexpected to my opponent and that  thought sort of very rapid kind of  thought according to current views is  much too quick to be done consciously it  has to be unconscious but I thought no  no I was thinking it consciously but the  view is that you could do this maybe if  you realize that there's something about  quantum reality involved at conscious  experience I'm only putting this out as  a sort of slight feel of some mind. I  don't have any theory of this but I am  indicating that it could be much more  subtle issue certainly than a computer.  There's something much more subtle going  on which could involve this difference  in notion between quantum reality and  classical reality which is something  there in the real world. It's in the  real world, but it's very  peculiar certainly in relation to  temporal  um orderings and things like that. Thank  you very much.  [Applause]